TAPA Output Files
=================

TAPA generates various output files depending on the input options provided.
This documentation outlines the structure and contents of these files.

Output Artifact
---------------

The output artifact produced by ``tapa`` depends on the target selected with
``--target``.

**Xilinx Vitis target** (``--target xilinx-vitis``, the default)
  Produces an ``.xo`` object file, which serves as input for the Vitis ``v++``
  compiler for bitstream generation.

  In fact, the XO object is a ``.zip`` file, which can be ``unzip``\ ped to
  see the contents.  The XO object contains the RTLs corresponding to the C++
  source code and configuration files with metadata about the design.

  You may unzip the XO object, modify the RTLs, and zip it back to pass it to
  ``v++`` to customise the design to your needs.

**Xilinx HLS target** (``--target xilinx-hls``)
  Produces a ``.zip`` RTL archive instead of a ``.xo`` file.  The archive
  contains the same RTL files and metadata, but without the Vitis shell
  wrapper.  This is useful when the RTL is to be consumed directly by a
  downstream EDA tool or a custom integration flow rather than the Vitis
  toolchain.  The output file extension (``.zip`` versus ``.xo``) signals
  which target was used.

Reproducibility
---------------

TAPA strips timestamps, absolute paths, and random IDs from both ``.xo`` and
``.zip`` artifacts before writing them to disk.  Given the same source code
and tool versions, repeated invocations produce byte-identical output.  This
makes the artifacts suitable for CI/release attestation workflows where
reproducible builds are required.

.. note::

   Byte identity holds only within the same vendor tool version.  Upgrading
   Vitis HLS or Vivado will typically change internal artifact content even
   for identical source inputs.

Intermediate Files
------------------

When the ``--work-dir`` option is used (recommended), TAPA saves intermediate
files to the specified directory.  The structure is as follows:

.. code-block:: text

   work_dir/
   ├── cpp/
   ├── flatten/
   ├── log/
   ├── tar/
   ├── hdl/
   ├── graph.json
   ├── settings.json
   ├── report.json
   └── report.yaml

1. ``cpp/`` Directory

   - Contains C++ code for each task extracted by ``tapa``.
   - Each file is independently compiled to RTL by ``vitis_hls``.

2. ``flatten/`` Directory

   - Created during the ``tapa analyze`` step.
   - Contains preprocessed (flattened) copies of the input source files, one
     per input file, with a short hash prefix in the filename to avoid
     collisions.  These copies have all ``#include`` directives expanded and
     comments preserved, allowing ``tapacc`` to operate on self-contained
     translation units.

3. ``log/`` Directory

   - Stores logs from various processing steps.
   - Includes logs from ``vitis_hls`` ``csynth_design``.

4. ``tar/`` Directory

   - Contains one or more ``.tar`` archive files.
   - Each ``.tar`` file includes the output of ``csynth_design`` for a single
     task.

5. ``hdl/`` Directory

   - Stores RTL files for all tasks generated by ``vitis_hls``.
   - Includes TAPA-specific infrastructure RTL.

6. ``graph.json``

   - JSON file recording all contents and metadata of the input design.

7. ``settings.json``

   - Records compilation settings that are shared across pipeline steps (e.g.
     target, part number, clock period, platform).  Downstream ``tapa``
     sub-commands read this file to avoid repeating options on the command
     line.

8. ``report.json`` / ``report.yaml``

   - Post-synthesis resource utilisation report produced when
     ``--enable-synth-util`` is passed to ``tapa synth``.
   - Both files contain the same data; ``report.json`` uses JSON encoding and
     ``report.yaml`` uses YAML encoding.
   - These files are absent when ``--enable-synth-util`` is not specified.
